Moving internationalization wiki page to jenkins.io (#2642)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/doc/developer/internationalization/new-internationalization.adoc

---

> title: New Internationalization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Internationalization and Localization
```
This document seems to cover both of these.

layout: developersection
---
 

> https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/How+to+view+Jenkins+in+your+language[How

Reviewer: Broken link.

Reviewer 2: The wiki redirection works now for this one :)

to view Jenkins in your language].

'''''

== Translations to Specific languages

> * https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/Chinese+%28Traditional%29+Translation[Chinese

Reviewer: I think all the links in this section are broken.   Should we prioritize porting these to jenkins.io?

Reviewer 2: Didn't found this particular file in https://github.com/jenkins-infra/docker-confluence-data/tree/main/content/JENKINS so yes this link is dead, but the others are up again.

For information, redirections to more pertinent pages on jenkins.io can also be added in https://github.com/jenkins-infra/docker-confluence-data/blob/main/nginx/nginx.conf if needed.

(Traditional) Translation]
* https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/Chinese+%28Simplified%29+Translation[Chinese
(Simplified) Translation] 
* https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/French+Localization[French
Localization]
* https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JA/Japanese+Localization[Japanese
Localization]
* https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/Polish+Localization[Polish
Localization]
* https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/Spanish+Translation[Spanish
Translation]
* https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/Brazilian+Portuguese+Translation[Brazilian
Portuguese Translation]

== What developers need to know/do

> Jenkins' i18n support has some aspects that developers need to be aware
> of.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers must do the following to localize a plugin or other module:
```

> . Generation of type-safe `+Messages+` classes from
> `+Messages.properties.+`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Generate type-safe `+Messages+` classes from `+Messages.properties.+`.
```

> . Marking messages in jelly files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Mark messages in jelly files.
```

> . Creation of html files for help tips.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create html files for help tips.
```

> === Generation of `+Messages+` classes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Generate `+Messages+` classes
```

> Jenkins uses http://java.net/projects/localizer/[localizer] to generate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jenkins uses the Java https://docs.oracle.com/middleware/1212/wls/WLAPI/index.html?weblogic/i18n/Localizer.html/[lLocalizer] package to generate
```
The existing link is broken (java.net has been deprecated) so I chose a different page for this link -- please verify whether this is a good choice.

Useful to specify that this is a Java package rather than just show "localizer" in the text.  And this reference page capitalizes Localizer so I followed suit.

> classes for accessing message resources in a type-safe way. For each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
classes that access message resources in a type-safe way. For each
```

`+src/main/resources/**/Messages.properties+`, a Messages class is

> generated. See the referenced page for how this class looks like. If

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generated. See the referenced page to see what this class looks like. If
```

your IDE fails to find these classes, manually add

> "target/generated-sources/localizer" directory to your source root.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the "target/generated-sources/localizer" directory to your source root.
```

Wherever the code returns a String for display purpose (such as
`+Descriptor.getDisplayName()+`), use the Messages class to obtain a

> localized message. At the runtime, a proper locale is selected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
localized message. At runtime, a proper locale is selected
```

automatically. A typical workflow for this is as follows:

> . You identify messages that need be localized

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Identify messages that need be localized
```

> . You place that in Messages.properties. One can choose to have this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. You place those messages in Messages.properties. You can use
```

> file for each package, or you could just have one such file for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
one file for each package, or you could have one such file for the
```

whole module/plugin.

> . You run `+mvn compile+` once to re-generate `+Messages.java+`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Run `+mvn compile+` once to re-generate `+Messages.java+`
```

. Update your code to use the newly generated message formatting method
+
[cols="",]
|===
|As usual, looking at how the core code does this might help you get the
idea of how to do this.
|===
+
[cols="",]
|===
|*Note:* If your message contains single quote character ('), then you

> need to escape it with another single quote character (i.e. ''). So

Reviewer: ```suggestion
need to escape it with another single quote character such as ''. So
```
Need to check how that '' (two single quote characters) is rendering.Github is not rendering it correctly, even in this comment!

> "that's" becomes "that''s". If you're in need of an apostrophe character

Reviewer: again, check rendering

you might consider using ’ - the unicode character U+2019, written in
properties file as \u2019.
|===

=== Marking messages in jelly files

Your jelly files in `+src/main/resources+` often contain messages that
need to be localized, and those need to be marked as well.

In the simplest case, suppose you have a part of a Jelly file that looks
like the following:

[width="100%",cols="100%",]
|===
a|
....
<h1>Output</h1>
<p>...</p>
....

|===

> Then all you need to do is to change this to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Change this to the following:
```

[width="100%",cols="100%",]
|===
a|
....
<h1>${%Output}</h1>
<p>...</p>
....

|===

> The $\{%...} marker indicates stapler to look for localized resources,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The $\{%...} marker tells stapler to look for localized resources,
```

> and when none is found it'll just print "Output" for this, which is what

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and, if none are found,  it prints "Output" for this, which is what
```

you want.

Let's consider the case where the localization requires parameters.
Suppose you have a Jelly file `+foo.jelly+` like this:

[width="100%",cols="100%",]
|===
a|
....
<p>Click <a href="${obj.someMethod(a,b,c)}" >here</a></p>
....

|===

> In this case, first you have to write `+foo.properties+` for the default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, first you must write `+foo.properties+` for the default
```

locale:

[width="100%",cols="100%",]
|===
a|
....
click.here.link=Click <a href="{0}" >here</a>
....

|===

> Then update `+foo.jelly+` to refer to this like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then update `+foo.jelly+` to refer to this:
```

[width="100%",cols="100%",]
|===
a|
....
<p>${%click.here.link(obj.someMethod(a,b,c))}</p>
....

|===

> If you have multiple parameters you can pass them by separating ','

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can pass multiple parameters, separating them with ','
```

(just like a function call), and from property files you can reference
them as \{0}, \{1}, etc., by following
http://java.sun.com/j2se/1.4.2/docs/api/java/text/MessageFormat.html[the
MessageFormat class convention].

> Now consider the case where you put a message in an expression like
> this. Suppose you have a Jelly file like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now consider the case where you put a message in an expression. Suppose you have a Jelly file like this:
```

[width="100%",cols="100%",]
|===
a|
....
<p>${h.ifThenElse(x,"no error","error")}</p>
....

|===

You can mark those two strings for localization like this:

[width="100%",cols="100%",]
|===
a|
....
<p>${h.ifThenElse(x,"%no error","%error")}</p>
....

|===

Finally, because you can use expressions in Jelly, you need to ensure
your regular strings don't contain brackets. +
For example, this will *not* parse correctly, as it will be parsed as an
expression:

[width="100%",cols="100%",]
|===
a|
....
<h1>${%Path to file (.ipa or .apk)}</h1>
....

|===

You need to create two separate strings in this case:

[width="100%",cols="100%",]
|===
a|
....
<h1>${%Path to file} (${%.ipa or .apk})</h1>
....

|===

> === Creation of html files for help tips.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Create html files for help tips.
```

> It is possible in jelly files to configure entries which can show a tip
> message when the user clicks on a help icon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure entries in jelly files that display a tip message when the user clicks on a help icon.
```

[width="100%",cols="100%",]
|===
a|
....
<f:entry title="${%title}" help="/plugin/myPlugin/help.html">
....

|===

Then, just create the file help.html for English or help_xx.html for the
'xx' language.

== What translators need to know/do

The Jenkins project always welcomes contributions to translations. If
you are interested in helping us, just file a pull request on GitHub. In

> the remainder of this section, we'll discuss what needs to be translated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the remainder of this section, we discuss what needs to be translated
```

and how.

[cols="",]
|===
|Remember that properties files must be encoded in
http://java.sun.com/javase/6/docs/api/java/util/Properties.html[ISO
8859-1]. This should be the default anyway.
|===

=== Translation tools

* https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/Translation+Tool[Translation
Tool] : Command line tool to help translators to generate files, add
missing keys, and more.
* https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/Translation+Assistance+Plugin[Translation
Assistance Plugin] : Adds a dialog box in Jenkins to translate and send

> missing keys.

Reviewer: These links are broken.

=== Translating `+Messages.properties+`

> Developers place messages that require localizations in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers place messages that require localization in
```

`+Messages.properties+`. Those need to be translated in the usual
manner. See `+Messages_ja.properties+` in the core as an example if you
are new to this process.

> Sometimes looking at `+Messages.properties+` alone doesn't give you
> enough contextual information as to where the messages are used. For
> this, developers are encouraged to access messages by using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If looking at `+Messages.properties+` alone does not give you
enough contextual information about where the messages are used. you can access messages by with the
```

type-safe `+Messages+` class generated by
http://java.net/projects/localizer/[localizer]. To find out where
messages are actually used, use your IDE to find all the usages of the
message format method.

=== Translating message references in Jelly

The other messages that need to be translated are in Jelly view files,
which are in `+src/main/resources/**.jelly+`. To localize them, first

> you run Maven to generate skeleton property file for your locale:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you run Maven to generate a skeleton property file for your locale:
```

[width="100%",cols="100%",]
|===
a|
....
$ cd jenkins/core  (or a plugin dir)
$ mvn stapler:i18n -Dlocale=fr
....

|===

> This will generate a bunch of `+*_fr.properties+` all over
> `+src/main/resources+` with an empty value. If the file already exists,
> it will append missing entries to existing files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This generates a bunch of `+*_fr.properties+` throughout
`+src/main/resources+` with an empty value. If the file already exists,
it appends missing entries to existing files.
```

> You then need to work on each such property file and translate messages.
> You don't have to translate the entire file — if you leave some entries
> empty, they'll fall back to the default locale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can then translate messages in each property file.
It is not necessary to translate the entire file;
entries that are empty fall back to the default locale.
```

[cols="",]
|===

> |https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/1333[Quick locale

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|https://https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/quick-locale-switcher2/[Quick Locale Switcher]
```
The existing link is broken.  I went to the Firefox extensions list and found another addon with the same title so substituted that URL.  Please verify that this is correct.

> switcher] firefox extension is useful to toggle between various locales.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extension  to Firefox is useful to toggle between various locales.
```

|===

=== Translating static HTML resources

Stand-alone HTML files are often used in Jenkins for things like inline

> help messages. These resources need to be translated by adding the
> locale code between the file name and the extension. For example, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
help messages. To translate these resources, add the
locale code between the file name and the extension. For example, the
```

> Japanese version of `+abc.html+` would be `+abc_ja.html+`, and British

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Japanese version of `+abc.html+` would be `+abc_ja.html+`, and the British
```

> version of it could be `+abc_en_GB.html+`. These files need to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
version of it could be `+abc_en_GB.html+`. These files must be
```

encoded in UTF-8.

=== Pushing changes

> Once you made some changes, you can commit them. Translators should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After making some changes, you can commit them. Translators should
```

consider themselves as owning property files for their locale, so feel
free to go ahead and just commit. If you are new to this, doing a small

> commit first is a good idea. You can also always send in a patch if you
> prefer to be safe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
commit first is a good idea. You can instead send in a patch if you
prefer to be safe.
```

> When starting a translation, try to check if there's anyone else working

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When starting a translation, try to check if anyone else is working
```

on the same locale. You can find out who they are by finding existing
localization and looking at its history. Try to get in touch with them
to avoid a surprise.

== Stapler plugin for IntelliJ IDEA

Refactoring the existing code to handle i18n correctly is tedious. So
https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/IntelliJ+IDEA+plugin+for+Stapler[IntelliJ

> IDEA plugin for Stapler] is developed to simplify this (note that

Reviewer: This link is broken.  This is discussed in https://www.jenkins.io/doc/developer/development-environment/ide-configuration/ , which references https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/1885-stapler-framework-support (reference shows the full URL rather than "IntelliJ IDEA plugin for Stapler).  I'm not sure how to rewrite this section/link.

JetBrains kindly offered the open-source license for the Jenkins
project, so contributers can get the license for free — contact Kohsuke

> if you need one.)

Reviewer: What is the proper way to obtain this license now?  If it really is still Kohsuke, we should provide contact information.

Once installed, this adds a menu item in the main menu, under
"Refactor." It is highly recommended to give some keyboard short cut to
this. I use "Ctrl+Alt+I": +
image:../images/developer/internationalization/menuItem.png[image,title="Jenkins > Internationalization > menuItem.png"] +

> Now, to use this feature, select the message you'd like to
> internationalize, then trigger this refactoring command. It'll ask you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use this feature, select the message to be
internationalized, then trigger this refactoring command. It will ask you
```

the message property name for this, so pick a name: +
image:../images/developer/internationalization/before.png[image,title="Jenkins > Internationalization > before.png"] +

> IDEA will place the message into the resource file, and adjust the code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IDEA places the message into the resource file and adjusts the code
```

accordingly. Note that an error is highlighted until you run
`+mvn compile+` again to generate new methods on the `+Messages+`
class. +
image:../images/developer/internationalization/after.png[image,title="Jenkins > Internationalization > after.png"]

== Stapler plugin for NetBeans

See
https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/JENKINS/NetBeans+plugin+for+Stapler[NetBeans

> plugin for Stapler] for details.

Reviewer: Another broken link.  This is also discussed in https://www.jenkins.io/doc/developer/development-environment/ide-configuration/ , with a link to http://plugins.netbeans.org/plugin/43938/?show=true , but the netbeans link also seems to be broken.  The github repo for this plugin is https://github.com/stapler/netbeans-stapler-plugin -- this is what is referenced from the https://www.jenkins.io/doc/developer/tutorial/prepare/ page.

Reviewer 2: No much more content in the original wiki page alas:
> Support for Stapler and other Jenkins core/plugin development needs from the NetBeans IDE.
> [GitHub home](https://github.com/stapler/netbeans-stapler-plugin)
> [Plugin Portal downloads](http://plugins.netbeans.org/plugin/43938/?show=true)

== Translation Completeness Reports

Visit http://www.simonwiest.de/glottr/report/ for Glottr Report by

> https://wiki.jenkins.io/display/~swiest[Unknown User (swiest)]

Reviewer: The first link is valid but the second one is not.
